# AMP-Diffusion

[Cell Biomaterial Link](https://www.cell.com/cell-biomaterials/fulltext/S3050-5623(25)00174-6) | [Preprint Link](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.03.03.583201v1) | [GenBio Link](https://openreview.net/forum?id=145TM9VQhx)

Note, this is the repo to demonstrate the model architechture of reusing ESM2 attention layers with diffusion (ampdiffusion.py), and how to evalute PPL with ProGen2 (ppl.py). One can also find some generated samples from our model and others in results folder. The project was done in early 2023, a while ago before Diffusion outbreak in Bio domain, so many of features/training techniques or modeling technicques might be outdated these days. Users might want to refer to more recent and advanced diffusion/flow matching model.

## Abstract

Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) have emerged as a potent class of generative models, demonstrating exemplary performance across diverse AI domains such as computer vision and natural language processing. In the realm of protein design, while there have been advances in structure-based, graph-based, and discrete sequence-based diffusion, the exploration of continuous latent space diffusion within protein language models (pLMs) remains nascent. In this work, we introduce AMP-Diffusion, a latent space diffusion model tailored for antimicrobial peptide (AMP) design, harnessing the capabilities of the state-of-the-art pLM, ESM-2, to de novo generate functional AMPs for downstream experimental application. Our evaluations reveal that peptides generated by AMP-Diffusion align closely in both pseudo-perplexity and amino acid diversity when benchmarked against experimentally-validated AMPs, and further exhibit relevant physicochemical properties similar to these naturally-occurring sequences. Overall, these findings underscore the biological plausibility of our generated sequences and pave the way for their empirical validation. In total, our framework motivates future exploration of pLM-based diffusion models for peptide and protein design.


## Citation

If you find this work useful in your research, please consider citing:
```bibtex
@article{torres2025generative,
  title={Generative latent diffusion language modeling yields anti-infective synthetic peptides},
  author={Torres, Marcelo DT and Chen, Leo Tianlai and Wan, Fangping and Chatterjee, Pranam and de la Fuente-Nunez, Cesar},
  journal={Cell Biomaterials},
  volume={1},
  number={9},
  year={2025},
  publisher={Elsevier}
}
```

```bibtex
@article{chen2024amp,
  title={AMP-diffusion: Integrating latent diffusion with protein language models for antimicrobial peptide generation},
  author={Chen, Tianlai and Vure, Pranay and Pulugurta, Rishab and Chatterjee, Pranam},
  journal={bioRxiv},
  pages={2024--03},
  year={2024},
  publisher={Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory}
}
```

## Acknowledgments

- This project builds upon the excellent work of [Lucidrains  on diffusion models](https://github.com/lucidrains/denoising-diffusion-pytorch/tree/main)


## License
This project is licensed under the MIT License.
